\chapter*{Acknowledgment}
I take the privilage to express my  gratitude towards
my supervisors, Prof. Gauranga Lal Datta and Prof. D. K. Pratihar, for their constant guidance and encouragement. I am grateful to Prof. Datta who gave me an opportunity to work in, a highly coveted field,  electron beam welding. Prof. Pratihars heartful initiative exposed me into the vast untrodded world of soft computing.

\par



\par I am  obliged to Prof. S. K. Som and Prof. A. K. Chattopadhyay, former and present Head, Department of Mechanical Engineering, for providing me an opportunity to work in the department. I also express my sincere gratitude to Prof. Ranjan Bhattacharya, the coordinator of research scholars of my department.  I also thank Prof. S. Paul for giving me innovative ideas during my experimental works. I gratefullu extend my heartiest thanks to all my DSC members, 
Prof. S. Roy, Prof. Dr. G. Chakraborty and Dr. J. Datta Majumdar.


\par
This is the right moment to acknowledge my senior and well wisher Dr. Alok Kumar Nandy who relentlessly  supported me in my day to day job as well as in  the research work. His words of encouragement  during the difficult times used to boost my moral. I also like to thank the  scholars Dr. Nirmal Hui, Dr. Mahesh Parappagoudar, Dr. V. Pandu Ranga and my juniors of Soft computing lab.
 \par

I like to heartfully thank Dr. A. V. Bapat for providing me an opportunity to work on various EBW machines of BARC Mumbai. I also thank Dr.   as he managed to provide the EBW facility of CDM for experimental work inspite of a heavy production schedule. I thank my friend Mr. Mahanand Jha along with Mr. T. K. Saha  who, inspite of their important official responsibilites, participated in the experiments carried out at BARC Mumbai.
\par 
I am forever indebted to my father, Shree Shankar Prasad Dey, and mother ,Shrimati Gauri Dey, who inspite of their limited resources, educated me and motivated me in the right way to pursue higher education. I am also grateful to my younger sister, Jolly, and younger brother, Prodyot, as their struggle to achieve their goal emboldened me during my tough times.
\par
My warm regards to my father-in-law, Shree Mukti Pada Das, and mother-in-law, Shrimati Sephali Das, for the care they took towards my wife and kid during the hours of need. I am sincerely grateful to them for their moral support and prompt physical presence, in-spite of their old age and poor health, even for the most minor concern, irrespective of whether I was at IIT or  away from  for academic or official reasons . I also extend my deepest gratitude to my brother-in-law, Shree Dhiman Das, his wife Ruchira and their child Aaheli  for their invaluable love, and affection.

 \par

I express my profound gratitude to my wife, Surekha without her motivation, inspiration, untiring
assistance and dedicated involvement into my research work, this work have not been completed. 
I dedicate this thesis to my wife, Surekha, and son, Manu for their endless love and affection.\par

Last but not the least, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to all
of them who directly and indirectly helped me for the successful completion
of my thesis work. \\ 
\vspace {5mm}
\begin{flushright}
V. Pandu Ranga \\
Department of Mechanical Engineering \\
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur \\
India \\
\end{flushright}
